Hello, fellow vapers! My first blog post! Not sure yet just how much I’ll be using this blog, or what I’ll be using it for, but today I’m ready to review some juices I just got in the mail. Reason I’m blogging this juice review instead of just posting it on reddit is actually because they’re apparently fairly fresh juices. I’m just too impatient to not give them a little taste before steeping. I’ll uncap them when I’m done and revisit the flavors in a week.

A couple of notes – Reviews aren’t in the same order as vaping. I only have one dripping atty at the moment, so I felt I needed to cycle through in a complimentary order. Sadly, this probably still affected the experience of at least one juice. Again, I will be revisiting these flavors in a week or more, and will hopefully have clearer impressions of them.

~~~

First up is a fairly well-known juice vendor who I hadn’t tried before, FuZionVapor. They were offering a pretty sweet discount, despite my being broke at the time, and I’d seen enough people rave about them on the reddit vapers’ forum, I figured it was time to try a sample pack.

Right off the bat, I like the fact that their sample pack comes in a generous size – three 10ml bottles of your pick of juice, for $16.50. They were quick to deliver, and provided a USPS tracking number. My only criticism is that their website is kind of slow. Hopefully, if business keeps being kind to them, they’ll be able to move that to a quicker server or something.

My sample pack picks were Origamistic, XTC, and Mr. Miyagi.

Origamistic – Okay, I’m going to review this blind, because I can’t even remember the description of this, or why I picked it. Instead of looking it up, I’m going to take advantage of that and just try it. First off, I just have to smell it, because I recently cleaned my lame-assed dripping atty (I’m hoping to pick up an Igo or Bilby in the coming weeks). Idunno, it’s like I have to burn through a bit of juice to prime the damned thing, otherwise it tastes like hard burned ass. Origamistic smells interesting, though. There’s a Chai-like spiciness to it, but also an underlying cherry that may or may not remind me of urinal cakes. That’s just my initial impression, though. I have high hopes!

…All right. It’s definitely a chai thing. Why did I order this? I guess to try something different? And it’s definitely different. My vapes tend to be pretty sweet, and while this isn’t completely lacking in sweet, it’s more spice and complexity than I’m used to. Not necessarily a bad thing, and I’ll be really curious to taste it after steeping and in a proper atty or tank.

Actually, it’s weird, but after a bit, I think I kind of love it. It absolutely has a throat hit, even at 6mg, and it’s definitely there, on your tongue, even as a fairly fresh juice. I actually went back for a second fill on my dripper, just because. Dayum.

Next up, Mr. Miyagi – This one is pretty heavy on the apple. I got it because ever since I fell in love with VapeRites’s Apple Pie juice, I want to try other juicers’ apple pie variations. At first, I was still getting a little of the chai from Origamistic in my vape on this one, so I’ll definitely come back to it to be sure. After a second dripping (to clear out the chai) it was more apple-pie-ish, sweet but not cloying, mellow but very present. All with a good throat hit, too. Not sure if I’d bother buying it again, but I will definitely go through this sample bottle. At some point, I’ll collect some apple pie flavors and line ’em up to pick my winner. Mr. Miyagi is in the running for sure – it tastes true.

XTC – Smells like sweet berry crack. Tastes like berry-sugarness. Doesn’t make me writhe in bliss and tastebud nirvana, but it’s vapeable. Probably won’t buy it again, because I think I’m discovering that I like to be able to identify what fruit I’m vaping. Maybe it’s because this was my last juice in my vapemail to taste and my buds are tired, but I just feel kind of “meh” about it right now. I’ll have to get back to it, probably in a clearo.

~~~

Next in my mailbox was a package from The Vapor Chef, a new online juice vendor with a snazzy looking website and an interesting background in culinary arts. I placed my order late last week (Friday or Saturday, I think), and received it the next Wednesday, including government holiday delays. The juices I ordered were: PB Nomnoms, Unicorn Poop, and Frosty Blue Jazzberry. Honey Pearry came as an additional sample!

PB Nomnoms was the one full-sized juice I bought this time. I don’t think I was expecting this, but it came in a nice, solid, glass bottle with eyedrop dripper.

Off the bat, I’m sure this one is going to need more steeping. But the first thing you get opening the bottle is the smell of real peanuts, more than the sugar of the cookie. On vaping, however, the other bakery/cookie flavors really come through. This is my first peanutbutter/peanut vape, and my first in my search for a great peanutbutter cookie vape. It’s good right out of the box, but I really can’t wait to try it again in a week.

Unicorn Poop – This one sells on the name alone, of course. My first impression? Sweet sweetness. It’s a cupcake/cookie vape, and it does as advertised. Sort of a light-berry-flavored sugary treat on the bakery-end of things. I dig it, but I’m not over-the-moon in love enough to buy more. Still, if you’re looking for a cupcakey frosting-ness vape, Unicorn Poop is a solid bet. Again, I suspect in a week it’ll be even better. And I suspect I’m really going to like it more in a Vivi Nova.

Frosty Blue Jazzberry – Not a favorite. Description says, “blue raspberry ice.” To be fair, I think I interpreted that as a slushy sort of flavor, for some stupid reason. What I got was kind of a weird berry flavor with a cool note. Well, that might actually be what it’s supposed to be. Maybe it’s just that I’m not much on raspberry flavors and was expecting something more on a sweet blueberry end. I know, I know – RTFM. It does taste like raspberry. And coolness. So while I personally don’t care for it, it still holds as a decent flavor because it is what it claims to be. Maybe it’ll grow on me – it’s not unvapeable by any means.

Honey Pearry – Apparently this is a local favorite for this vendor. I was really glad they threw it in as a freebie, because I’d wished I’d bought it to try out, anyway.

On first vape, I’m barely getting any strawberry. It’s very, very heavy on the honeydew, but I can definitely make out the pear. After a few longer vapes, though, I can just make out a hint of strawberry. I’m honestly not sure how I feel about this juice, as I’m not crazy about melons as a food, and this really, really tastes like a honeydew. Again, it is a juice that tastes as described, and I can’t fault that, even if my own tastebuds don’t jump up and down in glee. Maybe the strawberry will rise up a bit after steeping.

Kind of like the Frosty Blue Jazzberry, though, the more I vape it, the more I’m starting to dig it.

~~~

So there it is. First impressions of FuZion Vapor and The Vapor Chef. I’m using a standard Joye 510 bridgeless atty, around 2.2ohms resistance. I was using my twist at first, but switched to my Vamo, right around 9Watts. All juices were 6mg nicotine, 50/50 VG/PG. All juices were juices I personally purchased, with the exception of the Honey Pearry freebie from Vapor Chef. Vape hard, vape strong!

Advertisements