Years ago I had a recipe for a Pumpkin Chocolate bundt cake—I think it was from Eating Well Magazine? I made it for pretty much every special occasion in the fall—Halloween, Thanksgiving, my birthday, even Christmas! Sadly though, the recipe wasn’t vegan and after becoming vegan I never bothered to go back and try to veganize it. A few weeks ago my little sister was in town and wanted to celebrate her birthday with a big family dinner at my parents’ house. She was making her own cake and asked me to bring a vegan cake for my family. As I thought about what to make my mind wandered to an old recipe of mine, and I decided to make some swaps to give it some festive fall flair. And that is how my Pumpkin Chocolate Cake with Ginger was born!

This cake is SO easy to make! It’s a simple 1 layer cake so it is very low maintenance. Simply mix (by hand!), pour into the pan, and bake. And because it’s just 1 layer it’s easy to transport to holiday gatherings—no wobbling cake layers to slide apart in the car.

The best part? This easy recipe can be jazzed up and decorated for multiple occasions! Having a Halloween party? Then drizzle the top with white chocolate in a spider web design and top with a few plastic spiders to give it a spooky feel. My kids thought this was the coolest thing ever—spider cake! If you’re feeling fancy, say for Thanksgiving, keep it elegant with a dark chocolate drizzle and some sparkling candied ginger on top! I would even argue that you could carry this dessert all the way through until Christmas—there’s no reason the pumpkin love has to stop after Thanksgiving!

Or, you could just make this cake to jazz up a regular Tuesday. There are no rules for cake eating.

This cake is moist, fudgey, and super flavorful! I love finding little bit of candied ginger—the chocolate tempers it just enough so that it is sweet, not spicy! This cake lasts for at least 4 days on the counter—I haven’t been able to keep one around any longer than that to know how much longer it keeps 🙂

Whenever you choose to whip up this incredibly easy cake please take a picture and share it so that I can see! Tag it with #frieddandelions // @frieddandelions. I love to see what you’re working on in the kitchen!