PHILADELPHIA -- Desperate to see a victory again, Philadelphia fans wouldn't even wait for the end, standing to cheer as time was running out in the third quarter.

By then it was clear: The 76ers were going to win for the first time in two months, and they were going to do it with ease.

The 76ers snapped their NBA record-tying, 26-game losing streak, routing the Detroit Pistons 123-98 on Saturday night to avoid establishing the longest skid in U.S. major pro sports history.

"It's not something I want to be a part of," 76ers guard Michael Carter-Williams said, "so it's great that we got this win."

Carter-Williams and Thaddeus Young each scored 21 points for the 76ers, who won for the first time since beating Boston exactly two months ago and did it impressively, leading by as many as 32 points. They also ended an 18-game home losing streak, which was one shy of another NBA record.

Beaten badly a number of times during their skid, the 76ers got to experience life on the other side, ringing up a season-high 70 points in the first half.

Their 26 straight losses equaled the 2010-11 Cleveland Cavaliers and also the NFL's Tampa Bay Buccaneers, who dropped 26 straight from Sept. 12, 1976-Dec. 4, 1977.

"We were just happy to get a win," Young said. "I don't think it was for the streak or anything like that, we just wanted to go out there and win a basketball game and continue to just play."

It's been a rough season in Philadelphia, but the 76ers could finally smile after bringing an end to their 26-game losing streak. AP Photo/Matt Slocum

Henry Sims added 16 points for the Sixers, who hadn't won before their home crowd since beating Charlotte on Jan. 15. Fans in the crowd of 17,438 were into it from the start and grew louder throughout, standing and cheering in the final seconds of the third and then getting up again to deliver a standing ovation for the final 45 seconds of the game.

Greg Monroe had 20 points and 10 rebounds for the Pistons, who lost for the 11th time in 13 games. Blown out a night earlier by Miami, they made the 76ers look as good as the Heat with a sloppy effort that included 18 turnovers, many after starting point guard Brandon Jennings was ejected in the first quarter.

"They came out and competed tonight. They wanted it more than we did," Pistons guard Rodney Stuckey said.

The Sixers were expected to be among the NBA's worst teams, though they briefly fooled everyone when they opened the season by beating Miami and Chicago during a 3-0 start. But they look nothing like that team now, having traded three of their top players before February's trade deadline and replacing them with what coach Brett Brown said is the youngest team in league history, one that has been unprepared or perhaps just unqualified to win NBA games.