The MISC Reliant variant lineup is here! We’ve imagined MISC ’s entry into the starter market as an elegant yet utilitarian design capable of fulfilling a number of specific functions. Each Xi’An-tech infused variant has a specific role intended to offer expanded gameplay to the Star Citizen ‘verse. Whether you’re holding off rogues on the frontier, studying distant stars or broadcasting the latest action from the front lines, there’s a Reliant for everyone. We hope you enjoy the work our designers and artists have done developing three distinct new Reliant types!

About the Sale

The Reliant variants are being offered for the first time as a limited concept sale. This means that the ship design meets our specifications, but it is not yet ready to display in your Hangar or to fight in Arena Commander. The sale includes three year insurance on the ship hull and a pair of decorative items for your Hangar. A future patch will add a Reliant poster and then once the in-game model is finished you will also be given an in-game Reliant variant mini ship model! In the future, the ship price will increase and the offer will not include these extras.

If you’d like to add one to your fleet, they’re available in the pledge store until December 28th. You can also view a detail of the Reliant in the Holo Viewer in the Tech Overview of the ship page!

Disclaimer

Remember: we are offering this pledge ship to help fund Star Citizen’s development. The funding generated by sales such as this is what allows us to include deeper, non-combat oriented features in the Star Citizen world. Concept ships will be available for in-game credits in the final universe, and they are not required to start the game. All decorative ‘flare’ items will also be available to acquire in the finished game world. The goal is to make additional ships available that give players a different experience rather than a particular advantage when the persistent universe launches.



Reliant Kore – Mini Hauler (Base)



With the Reliant Kore, MISC adds to its already impressive lineup of ships, a smaller introductory-class spacecraft. Utilizing advanced Xi’An designs, the Reliant features broad, sleek wings, omni-directional thrusters and a fully-articulated two-seat cockpit that supports horizontal and vertical flight modes. All of this combines with a larger carrying capacity than many ships in its class to make the Kore a natural choice for short-range hauling, or with the simple addition of a few optional components, this can-do ship can do anything you dream of.



Visit the Reliant









Reliant Sen – Researcher (Variant A)



Magellan, Pierce, Croshaw, names that echo through history thanks to their adventurous spirit, a curious nature and a reliable ship. The Reliant Sen is a versatile mobile science platform; outfitted with long range capabilities to take you further, longer, and an advanced sensor suite. Perfect for the aspiring explorer who wants to whisper their name into the halls of history.



Visit the Researcher









Reliant Mako – News Van (Variant B)



The Empire depends on up-to-the-second information, which is why reporters need to be able to go where the news is happening: wherever, whenever. Enter the Mako, all the flexibility and dependability of a MISC Reliant combined with a state of the art Image Enhancement suite and turret-mounted optics to capture every moment as it happens with the clarity and accuracy that makes headlines.



Visit the News Van





