Ted Cruz’s (R-TX) campaign to restore constitutionality to government has generated some well-warranted attention since his entry into the Senate in January. Last week he continued his elegant and focused inquiries into his fellow senators’ legislation and initiatives, this time at a Senate Judiciary Committee hearing on Sen. Dianne Feinstein’s (D-CA) proposed legislation banning citizens’ ownership of specific types of firearms.

Cruz posed some simple questions. Would the limitations Feinstein’s legislation imposes on the Second Amendment, be likewise acceptable to impose on the First and Fourth? With regard to the First Amendment, could the government claim that some books were permissible to own and some not? In the case of the Fourth Amendment, could it ban unreasonable searches and seizures on one particular person, but not another?

In her answer, Feinstein chooses a road well trod, indeed paved, by liberal politicians – emotional appeal. She states that she has seen those shot by the bullets she wants to ban. She’s seen the devastation “assault weapons” cause. Americans don’t “need” a bazooka. It’s obvious that crimes involving guns are often tragic, but Feinstein does not respond to Cruz’s question on constitutionality at all, and her answer does not contain data or empirical evidence to support her stance on the issue of gun violence.

Although Feinstein tailors her language for the greater audience, she disregards the possibility that Cruz might have been doing likewise; expounding upon the Constitution’s finer points, and not for her benefit, but for that of the general public. She immediately moves into an aggressive posture, foregoing decorum and aiming to end the line of questioning via force of will. ”I’m not a sixth-grader,” she states, and since she’s been in the Senate for 20 years, and has been “up close and personal” to the Constitution, she says thanks-but-no-thanks to Sen. Cruz for his “lecture” on the document.

When Cruz, unfazed, repeats his unanswered question, Dick Durbin (D-IL) and Patrick Leahy (D-VT) come to Feinstein’s aid. Leahy begins with a jab at Texas and its regulations on which books are used in schools. Naturally, in his response that Vermont would never do such a thing, he unwittingly nods to federalism and to the 10th Amendment, both of which are at odds with Feinstein’s legislation. Durbin, noting that Cruz has been through law school, claims he surely must know that none of the rights listed in the Bill of Rights are absolute.

Pursuant to this line of thinking, Feinstein’s colleagues feed her the argument that child pornography is not protected under the First Amendment. Picking right up on it, she says, “It’s obvious that there are different tests on different amendments. What the senators were going to point out, and something that didn’t occur to me at the moment, was that there are certain kinds of pornographic materials that would not be covered by the First Amendment.” This is not the first time that this argument has been made, but in offering this analogy, Durbin and Leahy fed her dross.

The comparison seems sound at the outset. Child pornography is a form of “speech,” but we prohibit it despite the provisions of the First Amendment because it is morally wrong. Simple is it not? We can limit speech, therefore we can limit guns.

Let’s look at the elements of the comparison. The Second Amendment protects the right to bear arms. There are certain guns that are more destructive than others. However, any one of those guns, whether a BB gun or bazooka, could be used for either good or evil. That is to say, one could use a pistol as effectively as a fully automatic weapon in order to save innocent people from being killed. The proficiency with, and extent to which one used the weapon might differ, but it is possible to save a life with even the deadliest and seemingly unnecessary of weapons when they are used responsibly. The problem with the comparison is that, guns by themselves, are not morally wrong.

The First Amendment protects free speech. Speech likewise can be used for either good or evil, but there are certain kinds of “speech” (expression is a better word here) that are never beneficial to anyone. Child pornography is an example. No matter how it is used, it would never save, edify, or uplift a life. By definition, it damages both the objects of the images and the images’ consumers. It has nothing redeeming about it. So we ban it out of common-sense knowledge that it is pure evil.

The same cannot be said of guns. Law enforcement carries them. They can be used in genocide and senseless shootings, or they can be used to protect individuals from rapists, or to liberate entire countries. It cannot even be said of nuclear weapons that they must always be used for evil. The fact that Japan’s military aggression was not stopped by the first atomic bomb, and that the U.S. needed to drop a second, proves that they can be used (albeit in the most dire and unfortunate of circumstances) as a means to end war.

Cruz is adept at crafting very simple and very direct questions that, especially if ignored or dodged, will expose the true nature and aims of the Constitution’s opponents. To Feinstein’s credit, it took her less time than Eric Holder to reach the belated response that no, it would not be Constitutional for the Government to limit specific books, or allow unreasonable searches and seizures on one citizen but not another.

Yet despite being “reasonably well-educated,” she fails to see the defect in her prepackaged defense. Some things, like pornography, are evil through and through. Some things, such as guns, can be used for good when placed in the right hands.

Does the average United States citizen require a shoulder-fired rocket for self-defense? Luckily not. The reason for this is that our Constitution, and the blood of virtuous men, have built for us a civil society that is the finest in history. From the heights of this society, liberals like Leahy, Durbin, and Feinstein, look down and see a mass of stone they can shape to their liking. So they get out their chisels. After grinding away the very mountain upon which they stand, and when the landslide has brought them to the valley below, we will all have a much harder time climbing back up that mountain — if it remains a mountain at all.

Many might have seen Cruz’s questions as futile. The bill, after all, was expected to die in the Senate. As Feinstein pressed on despite the opposition (this time from her own party), likewise Cruz took a seemingly meaningless effort and gave it a great deal of meaning by his questioning.

So to Senator Cruz: Thank you. Keep going.

by