Hulaween is less than 30 days away from celebrating its fifth year as one of the most beloved musical festivals in the United States. Hulaween will be returning to the Spirit of Suwannee Music Park in Live Oak, FL from October 27th-29th with an extremely diverse and stacked line up. There are far more than 5 bands that you need to see this year at Hulaween, this is my list of must see sets for Hulaween 2017.

Run The Jewels

I’ve had the pleasure of seeing Run the Jewels live 3 times. My first time was at Bonnaroo in 2015. It was hands down one of the most energetic, passionate and out of control hip hop shows I’ve ever seen. Killer Mike and El-P are a force, they have chemistry that is unparalleled in live music. They create an atmosphere and energy force that the crowd feeds off. Their lyrics, the crowd, the energy and the relentless and heavy beats are all near flawless. This all comes together to create one of the best live shows anywhere in the world. Being part of it at Hulaween is a must see/experience event.

Go see RTJ if:

You Like Rowdy Hip Hop

You Feed Off The Energy from the Crowd

Catchy and Heavy Beats Make You Move Your Feets

You Enjoy Robbing People in the Streets

Moon Taxi

I first heard of Moon Taxi when they played at Hangout Fest in 2014. They covered a ton of Rage Against the Machine and absolutely killed it. After their set I decided get a few of their albums. While their studio stuff is very different than RATM, it was still some awesome stuff. Alt rockers at their core, Moon Taxi put on an amazing live show. I had the pleasure of seeing them again at Okeechobee Fest 2017 and they did not disappoint.

Go see Moon Taxi if:

Long Haired Front Men Get You Going

You Like a Good Alt Rock Band

You Want to See a RATM Song Covered Correctly

Space Jesus

I don’t really know how to explain Space Jesus, so bare with me. Space Jesus is a Brooklyn based Messiah who rains down dirty bass from far off electronic lands upon all of his apostles. He is a welcome new sound to the now over flooded EDM scene. His live sets are absolutely insane. He has a religious following of die hard fans that bring an astonishing amount of energy to his already wild sets.

Go See Space Jesus if:

You Love Bass

You Want Some Different Type of Dub Step

Wubba Lubba Dub Dub

You’re Ready to Sweat

Nathaniel Rateliff & the Night Sweats

Do you like lyrically driven folk rock? A leading man who can control a crowd with hypnotist like abilities? Stomping your feet and dancing along with 1,000’s of other people? Taking shots of whiskey in the middle of a hot summer day? If you answered yes to any of those questions then you need to see Nathaniel Rateliff & the Night Sweats. I saw Nathaniel Rateliff before he was with the Night Sweats in 2013, he opened for Dr. Dog and The Lumineers, his set was heartfelt, packed with energy and extremely memorable.

Rateliff has been doing this for a long time, his recent jump to fame came when he formed his newest band. Their song “S.O.B” felt like an overnight sensation, helping NR&NS tour across the world.

Go See Nathaniel Rateliff & the Night Sweats live if:

See questions 1-4 in paragraph 1 of this section.

Jacob Banks

“Born in Nigeria, Jacob Banks moved to Birmingham in England at the age of 13. Not short of talent, the Brit dabbled in all forms of the creative arts and began singing, playing guitar, and writing songs at the age of 20. A music lover first and foremost, Banks got his start at open mic nights and quickly garnered a following for his commanding vocal presence and daringly intimate songwriting. His music features richly textured beats, with its 808s and synth play, African inspired grooves and a soulful disposition that culminates in an unstoppable new sound. His stage presence leaves you wanting a bit more, but trust me, he has the voice of an angel.

There are dozens of more acts I want to see at Hulaween; Portugal the Man, RL Grime, Disco Biscuits, String Cheese (obviously, they’re Gods), Future Rock, Kamasi Washington and the Jon Stickley Trio just to name a few. Hulaween’s lineup is diverse and stacked as usual, but this festival is about way more than just the music. I always try to catch as many sets as possible, but sometimes there are things going on beyond the music that can captivate you.

If you haven’t purchased your tickets to Hulaween yet, get on that now, they’re selling out fast. I hope to see you there!