Tatiana Kouchnareva. July 2011.

***IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENT***

We've recently moved to our new farmland in Columbia Valley, BC, just 10 minutes away from the beautiful Cultus Lake. It takes lots of effort to get settled, with our garden and our poultry. Please be very patient with us as it will take much longer to process your seed orders, as we now are in a remote location and will only be able to mail orders once a week. Thank you for your continuing support of our preservation efforts!

Mission Statement

Our goal is to grow and maintain seeds for thousands of open-pollinated vegetable varieties, provide accurate variety descriptions, research and share historical information, and make seeds available to general public.

We garden using 'nature-friendly' methods to maintain healthy environment and our health. This means no toxic sprays for disease control, no pesticides (even organic like cayenne/garlic mix).

Who We Are and What We Do

We are one of the largest privately owned and privately funded seed banks in North America. Certainly the largest one in Canada! We maintain over 4,000 varieties of open-pollinated, non-GMO, vegetables.

We are very unique in our mission, as we focus on collecting and sharing not only the seeds along with fruits and plants characteristics, but also historical information about our varieties. Historical information is a very important part of seed preservation, and we are so happy to see many small seed vendors following the trend!

We welcome gardeners from all over the world to make contributions to the mission by sharing their growout notes and photographs at Tatiana's TOMATObase website. Please refer to Community Portal for more details.

We continue to collect and preserve endangered open-pollinated vegetable varieties and make them available to home gardeners. The proceeds from seed sales and donations help offsetting the cost of seed production and storage, and are our only source of funding at this time. Please buy seeds from Tatiana's TOMATObase Seed Store to support our mission.



Thank you so much for visiting!

Tatiana and Stan

Warning: for users with dial-up connection, it may take a while to load up the first page. If you experience slow response time, you can still order seeds via the Old order system (recommended for dial-up users).

We are offering a stunning variety of heirloom tomatoes, lettuces, and other vegetables, from mid-April to mid June 2018. Farm-gate sales in Columbia Valley, near Cultus Lake.

All plants are grown naturally in organic soil mix prepared from coconut coir, chicken and duck manure, SeaSoil, compost, peat moss, perlite, vermiculite.

prepared from coconut coir, chicken and duck manure, SeaSoil, compost, peat moss, perlite, vermiculite. Email Tatiana to schedule an appointment to purchase your heirloom plants.

Please visit Tatiana's TOMATObase Facebook page to 'like' us and subscribe to our updates on Facebook. You are so welcome to post your comments or questions!

What's New

Our Presentations and Workshops

2018 Seedy Saturdays

We attend the following Seedy Saturday events in BC: TBD

