Remember that song, “The Snake,” Donald Trump loved to quote from during the campaign?

It’s about a woman who takes in a cold and hungry snake she finds by a lake. But at the end of the song, the snake bites her and she dies:

“I saved you, ” cried the woman

“And you’ve bitten me, but why?

You know your bite is poisonous and now I’m going to die”

“Oh shut up, silly woman, ” said the reptile with a grin

“You knew damn well I was a snake before you took me in

“Take me in, tender woman

Take me in, for heaven’s sake

Take me in, tender woman, ” sighed the snake

Anyway, Trump liked to use the song as an allegory for crimes committed by illegal immigrants in America and liberals hated it. And they’ll hate it even more now that it seems Trump was right — again:

South Texas woman kidnapped by unauthorized immigrant she fed for 3 days, officials say | @debruijneline https://t.co/iAZrWbQZup — Dallas Morning News (@dallasnews) March 27, 2017

“‘I saved you.’ cried the woman!”

From the Dallas Morning News:

An unauthorized immigrant kidnapped a woman who had been providing him food and water for three days in South Texas, officials said. Shorty after he bound the woman’s feet and hands and forced her into a car on Wednesday in Dimmit County, she was able to escape, according to U.S. Customs and Border Protection. She fled from the vehicle as the immigrant attempted to start it. A witness notified the Dimmit County sheriff’s office about a woman who had her hands tied with rope walking down a road, officials said.

The man was later arrested by CBP agents after trying to fake a medical condition:

From the CBP:

After tracking the individual for some time with the use of Border Patrol and Dimmit County canines, officials encountered an unresponsive person matching the assailant’s description lying in the brush. A trained Border Patrol Emergency Medical Technician treated the unresponsive subject and transported him to the local hospital where it was determined by doctors the subject had been faking his condition. The woman who had been assaulted, while at the hospital, was able to identify the subject as the man who tried to kidnap her. Border Patrol agents were able to determine the subject was in the country illegally.

Video from the campaign:

Trump read a "poem" on the campaign trail that ends, "You know damn well I was a snake before you took me in" https://t.co/dBt25yoZyv — Harry Cheadle (@HCheadle) January 31, 2017

***