ENFP: I’m enthralled by you.

It’s not that their love lacks depth, intensity or commitment – quite the opposite, in fact – but when an ENFP says they love you, you can guarantee their heart is turning a thousand miniature cartwheels every time you enter the room. This type loves the way they do everything else – passionately, fully and enthusiastically. The thought of you drives them wild and their ‘I love you’ roughly translates to ‘My heart is basically BURSTING OUT OF MY CHEST every time I think about you, which is approximately all of the time.’

ENTP: I’m fascinated by you.

ENTPs view relationships the way they view everything in their lives – as an exciting puzzle to be explored and investigated. This type falls into fascination with the people in their lives – wanting to learn as much as they can about them and piece together their intricacies. When this type says ‘I love you,’ they are not just promising to care for you, they are letting you know that they are absolutely fascinated by you – and that they want to spend a significant amount of time trying to figure you out.

ISTJ: I will maintain my commitment to you come hell or high water.

When an ISTJ loves you, he or she is in it for the long haul. So long as both of you are on the same page, this dedicated type is willing to put in a seemingly endless amount of effort to make a relationship work. ‘Love’ truly is a verb to the ISTJ, and when they tell you ‘I love you,’ they’re preaching their unshakeable commitment to you.

INFP: Loving you has become a part of who I am.

Love is a deeply personal experience to the INFP and they take the feeling anything but lightly. When an INFP loves you, they aren’t just concerned for your wellbeing – they feel all of your pains, your struggles and your triumphs as their own. Loving you becomes a part of their core identity and part of the way in which they define their very selves. When this type says ‘I love you,’ they are letting you know that the way they feel about you has infiltrated their most intimate thoughts and emotions.

INTP: I will never stop trying to understand you.

INTPs may not be the most showy or romantic lovers, but they display their devotion subtly – by consistently trying to understand their partner (and their needs) better. This type enjoys analysing and dissecting what makes their loved ones tick – and the more they love you, the more invested they will be in this process. When an INTP says ‘I love you,’ what they’re really saying is that they’re committed to getting to understand you better and better every day.

ESTJ: I will spend my life striving to provide for you.

ESTJs are extremely invested in the wellbeing of their loved ones. Though they may not be gushy or showy when it comes to their affection, they make sure that the people they care about want and need for nothing. When an ESTJ says ‘I love you,’ they are telling you that they plan to work hard to make sure your needs are met – in whichever way they’re able to – for as long as they possibly can.

ESFJ: I want the world to know that you’re on my team.

To an ESFJ, love means being in sync with someone – and committing to tackle life together long-term. This affectionate type adores showering their loved ones with care and attention. They want to shout it from the rooftops when they’re deeply in love – and when they say ‘I love you,’ they’re really saying that they aren’t afraid to tell the world that you’re together – because they plan to be in it for the long run.

ISFJ: I value your happiness as my own.

ISFJs are selective about who they fall in love with – but once they fall, they fall deeply and completely. This huge-hearted type takes on the needs of their lovers as their own. They genuinely find it difficult to be personally happy if their loved ones are distressed, and therefore take it upon themselves to provide diligently for the people they care about. When an ISFJ says ‘I love you,’ they are telling you that they are incredibly invested in your happiness – and that they want to help you achieve it at any cost.

INTJ: I see a future with you.

To the future-focused INTJ, saying ‘I love you’ is not just an expression of affection – it’s a promise. This type is highly selective about who they invest themselves in emotionally – and if they have allowed themselves to fall in love with you, you can bet they’re picturing you in their future long-term. When an INTJ tells you ‘I love you,’ they’re telling you that you’re someone they hope to have in their lives for a very long time.

INFJ: I trust you with my heart.

INFJs are both overwhelmingly caring and notoriously skeptical of others – which results in them being highly selective about whom they place their trust in. For this type to fall fully in love, they need to feel completely comfortable with their partner – and to believe that they are someone they could fit with longterm. If an INFJ says ‘I love you,’ they are letting you know that they trust you – and that they see a future alongside you.

ENFJ: I will never stop trying to make you happy.

There is nothing the ENFJ type loves more than fostering deep, supportive relationships with their loved ones. When this type truly cares for someone, there is nothing they will not do to make that person happy. If an ENFJ tells you ‘I love you,’ you can rest assured that what they really mean is, ‘Your happiness is my happiness from this point onward.’

ENTJ: I would do anything on earth to protect you.

ENTJs may not be particularly expressive when it comes to their emotions, but the truth about this type is that they would absolutely take a bullet for the people they are devoted to. When an ENTJ says ‘I love you,’ what they’re really saying is that there’s nothing they wouldn’t do to help you succeed and to keep you protected from harm.

ESTP: I want to be your superhero.

ESTPs are notoriously adventurous and daring – but what is underrated about this type is their protective and softhearted side. When an ESTP loves you, they will eternally want to swoop in to save the day when things are falling apart for you. This type shows love through action – and when they tell you ‘I love you,’ what they really mean is, ‘I will be here to care and look out for you.’

ESFP: I choose you.

ESFPs live in a world of people possibilities – so when they’re willing to settle down with just one person, you can rest assured that they aren’t just blindly falling for you – they’re choosing you. Deliberately and pointedly. An ESFP saying ‘I love you,’ is them saying ‘I prioritise you above other people’ – and for a type as people-focused as the ESFP, that’s no small feat.

ISFP: We are meant for each other.

ISFPs are cautious and slow when it comes to falling in love – but when they do so, it’s because they feel as though they’ve truly found their other half. This type craves a deep, soulful connection with their significant other, and they are not quick to hand out ‘I love you’s.’ When this type tells you those three little words, it means they truly see you as the person their life has been missing all along.

ISTP: I want to prioritise you.

ISTPs may not be showy romantics, but they can always be counted on to tangibly demonstrate their love. When an ISTP truly cares about someone, they don’t mind making a few compromises and rearranging their lifestyle in order to accommodate them. When this type tells you ‘I love you,’ they’re making a promise to prioritise you above the independent lifestyle they treasure.