Robinson: The Journey [Review: 7/10] released on Oculus Rift last week through the Oculus Home Store and Steam marketplace. In the game, you control a young boy named Robin on an adventure through a strange, foreign planet overrun with dinosaurs. After crash landing, you’re tasked with finding your way off the planet with help from a robotic companion.

Crytek originally released Robinson on Sony’s PlayStation 4-powered PlayStation VR (PSVR) headset late last year to generally positive reception, although the length of the experience and utter lack of motion controller support have always been major sticking points. During the transition to the more powerful PC-powered Oculus Rift device, Crytek has improved the visual fidelity of the experience, making it more impressive to behold than ever. But in doing so, it still lacks the coveted motion controller support.

We decided to reach out to Crytek about the topic to see if they had any plans to incorporate support in a future update. Crytek’s PR Manager Hannes Knobloch responded:

We’re planning to look into Touch to see how it could enhance Robinson. The community wants it and if we find that motion controls add something to the game, we’ll see how we can implement it. As of last week’s Thursday Robinson is also available on Steam for the Rift. Regarding PS Move and the Vive, I can’t share anything at the moment.

While this is far from a definitive guarantee the game will get motion controller support, it certainly sounds like something that is at least being worked on. After releasing their first game, The Climb [Review: 8/10], during the first part of last year, the studio later added in Touch support when the controllers launched. Since Robin holds motion controller-shaped objects (shown below) and uses them to interact with creatures, places, and things during his travels, the inclusion of motion controller support seems natural.

Vive and PS Move support on the other hand, we have no further information on apparently. At least it seems like Touch support seems like a major possibility, rather than a massive question mark. Would the inclusion of motion controller support make you more interested in the game as a whole? Let us know in the comments below!

Tagged with: Crytek, move, oculus, rift, Robinson, the journey, touch