On the road again. Vancouver Whitecaps are on the road again. And that can only mean one thing, it’s match preview podcast time.

As the ‘Caps head east to Chicago to fight the Fire, we bring you a very special preview show, and one of our best episodes yet, even if we do say so ourselves!

Both team are winless, and draw specialists. Surely that can only mean one thing?!

Head coaches Carl Robinson and Frank Yallop set up the match for us before we bring you four exclusive one on one interviews with players from both teams.

Chicago’s new Designated Player Shaun Maloney is first up, as he talks about making the move to MLS, what he knows about the league, what he expects and his hopes for the Fire this season? Note, despite two Scots blathering on, there are no subtitles available for their chat!

Keeping it in the UK, English midfielder, and former Whitecap, Matt Watson drops by to talk about his time in Vancouver, the quickness of his move to Chicago, his first MLS goal and how he’s settled in as a Fire starter amidst all the squad changes.

Watson may be a familiar face to Whitecaps fans, but Vancouver have a familiar face to Fire fans in the form of goalkeeper Paolo Tornaghi. The ‘Caps number two keeper chats about what brought him over to MLS and the Fire from Italy, how he handles being a back up and lets us know if goalkeeping coach Marius Rovde is as crazy as we think he is!

And there’s still time to end the show with another chat with Chicago coach Frank Yallop. The former Vancouverite talks about just what went wrong in his first season in Chicago, building a squad he can call his own and what Fire fans can expect from their team this season.

Phew! All the game build up you can shake a stick at, so have a listen.

You can listen to this, and all previous, episodes of the podcast on iTunes HERE.

Or download it for your later listening delight HERE.

We also have an iPhone app, so you can now add our podcast to your phone as an app. Visit the podcast’s mobile site HERE and then at the bottom of the screen just click the “Quick Launch” icon and the podcast will be added to your home screen and appear as an app.

And if that’s not enough, we’re on Stitcher Radio Network . Download the app and listen to the AFTN podcast on your device, along with over 20,000 other shows HERE.

Or after all that, you could just listen on the player below!



