Dear Congress visitors and those who didn’t make it: Like in the previous years, the Video Operation Center will provide you with live streams and recordings of all main lecture halls (1, 2, G and 6) and the stage at Sendezentrum. As usual, you’ll find the video and audio streams at https://streaming.media.ccc.de and the recordings at https://media.ccc.de/c/32c3.

We also publish to our YouTube Channel “media.ccc.de” to cater to those with broken playback devices. We’ll continually be publishing the recordings there during Congress. Please avoid linking other channels which re-upload our work (with ads).

If you are unable to join us at the CCH you can also participate in 32C3 remotely as part of Congress Everywhere and meet up at a hackerspace to watch the streams, drink some Mate and ask questions via IRC or Twitter.

Again, we’re happy to be able to bring you additional content: Audio from the “Podcaster-Tisch” (Podcasting-Table) of the Sendezentrum as well as music from the Chaos-West Assembly, the Lounge, the Anti-Error-Lounge and from the Dome on the roof of the CCH.

Like at the previous Congress and this year’s Camp, all videos will be produced and published in HD and we try hard to ensure the best image quality and correct metadata on the files. Thus, we ask you not to record the streams (or at least not to publish such recordings), as those do not live up to the standards we set for our recordings. For the time between a talk and when we publish the recording, you can use the Relive system. We wrote more on the topic of stream dumps in this blog post.

We also did some upgrades with the live subtitles. They should now work on more devices and also when watching the video stream in fullscreen mode. The subtitles team will focus this time exclusively on halls 1 and 2 and wants to cover those 100%. In both halls the live subtitles can be watched on two screens in the front rows as well as on an arbitrary device via a web frontend. For this Angels are still wanted, both for live transcription and as responsible contact person for a hall.

Twitter: @c3subtitles

IRC: #subtitles auf hackint.org

32C3 Video Operation Center

—

Twitter: @c3streaming

Feedback: https://streaming.media.ccc.de/32c3/feedback/