12 minute read…

The idea of a basic income guar­an­tee (BIG) — where­by every cit­i­zen is uncon­di­tion­al­ly giv­en a guar­an­teed basic income, enough to get by but not enough to get rich — is far from new. While the idea seems to be slow­ly gain­ing trac­tion it seems mad­den­ing­ly dif­fi­cult to make it through the Overton win­dow (an idea that is suf­fi­cient­ly accept­able for a politi­cian to rec­om­mend, sup­port, and vote for with­out being con­sid­ered to rad­i­cal to get elect­ed or re-elect­ed).

Recently some big thinkers have made a con­cert­ed effort to wedge the Overton win­dow open far enough to slip the basic income guar­an­tee into the realm of suf­fi­cient accept­abil­i­ty.

Thoughtful con­ser­v­a­tives rec­og­nize that a guar­an­teed basic income is a very effec­tive way of fight­ing pover­ty while simul­ta­ne­ous­ly reduc­ing gov­ern­ment inef­fi­cien­cies, spend­ing, and intru­sion. The alt-right insists such a pol­i­cy would dis­in­cen­tivize work and encour­age lazi­ness (all the while para­dox­i­cal­ly insist­ing on tax cuts for cor­po­ra­tions and the rich).

Among the neolib­er­als, the Overton win­dow slams shut and fear of the polit­i­cal cost of such a de-pri­va­tized large-scale wealth redis­tri­b­u­tion makes it untouch­able.

Socialists have peren­ni­al­ly sup­port­ed a basic income guar­an­tee as a way to dis­trib­ute pub­licly-owned cor­po­rate prof­it (gen­er­al­ly known as a social div­i­dend) to ben­e­fit the entire pop­u­lace. The basic argu­ment is that a basic income guar­an­tee is a move to off­set cor­po­rate pri­va­ti­za­tion of prof­it and exter­nal­iza­tion of costs. A side ben­e­fit in the social­ist ver­sion would be the dis­con­nec­tion of work from income, there­by de-com­mod­i­fy­ing labor.

Use the best; leave the rest

In order to work for every­one, a basic income guar­an­tee would not replace what the con­ser­v­a­tives call “enti­tle­ment pro­grams,” specif­i­cal­ly Medicare and Social Security (both of which are not enti­tle­ments at all, but rather earned, defined ben­e­fit pro­grams). And both Medicare and Social Security work excep­tion­al­ly well at scale.

In a great com­pro­mise, a basic income guar­an­tee could be pro­posed and enact­ed by tak­ing the best bits of each faction’s posi­tions, there­by help­ing ensure near-uni­ver­sal buy-in. Take the gov­ern­ment inef­fi­cien­cy, spend­ing, and intru­sion bits from the con­ser­v­a­tives. Ignore the alt-right; the claims of work dis­in­cen­tiviza­tion and encour­age­ment of sloth are non­sen­si­cal. While it’s like­ly true that a basic income guar­an­tee would like­ly dis­in­cen­tivize menial employ­ment, that’s a pos­i­tive, not a neg­a­tive. The social­ist con­cepts of off­set­ting cor­po­rate prof­it pri­va­ti­za­tion and cost exter­nal­iza­tion are becom­ing more palat­able in the cur­rent polit­i­cal cli­mate.

Hillary Clinton failed to pro­vide a solu­tion to the eco­nom­ic trou­bles expe­ri­enced by the mid­dle and work­ing class. Instead, she did a lot of opti­mistic hand-wav­ing about the illu­so­ry eco­nom­ic improve­ments that may exist on paper but not in lives. Anyone breath­ing knows that house­hold income has been flat or falling for 50 years.

Donald Trump deft­ly acknowl­edged the obvi­ous and did a lot of disin­gen­u­ous hand-wav­ing about the illu­so­ry eco­nom­ic improve­ments he would bring mag­i­cal­ly by his mere elec­tion. Perhaps the biggest of Trump’s big pro­pos­als is an oh-so-pre­dictable tax cut.

Basic income guarantee is more effective and equitable than Trump’s tax cut

A remark­ably thor­ough analy­sis of Trump’s revised tax pro­pos­al by the Tax Policy Center (a joint ven­ture of the Urban Institute and the Brookings Institution) found that — sur­prise, sur­prise — “… the largest ben­e­fits, in dol­lar and per­cent­age terms, would go to the high­est-income house­holds.”

In the first decade of Trump’s scheme, fed­er­al rev­enues would fall by US$7 tril­lion. Counting on my fin­gers, that sounds an awful lot like US$700 bil­lion per year.

But it will stim­u­late the econ­o­my.

Yes, indeed it will. But Tom Streithorst writ­ing for Evonomics expos­es the pant­less wiz­ard behind that par­tic­u­lar cur­tain:

“Every Keynesian knows tax cuts will stim­u­late the econ­o­my but we also know that tax cuts give the least bang for the deficit buck. That is because tax cuts, like this one, gen­er­al­ly go to the rich­est among us and rich peo­ple have a greater propen­si­ty to save than the aver­age cit­i­zen. The rich can save their bonus, the rest of us spend it, which is what the econ­o­my needs. “The Trump tax cut gives the top 1 per­cent an aver­age wind­fall of US$215,000. The top 0.1 per­cent will save over US$1 mil­lion. Someone at smack in the mid­dle, on the oth­er hand, will gar­ner less than US$1000. Those in the bot­tom 20 per­cent will get $100. Were we to divide the cost of the tax cut by all adult Americans, we can give each cit­i­zen US$2600 a year. If we can afford a tax cut that will go dis­pro­por­tion­ate­ly to the very rich, we can also afford a heli­copter drop of cash to every adult cit­i­zen.”

The problem with not implementing a basic income guarantee

Oddly enough — and I’m think­ing things can’t get much more odd — Streithorst reck­ons Trump’s tax cut fal­la­cy, along with inevitable tech­no­log­i­cal advances, make a uni­ver­sal basic income inevitable:

“If things keep going the way they are, our soci­ety will divide into a small élite who own the tech­nol­o­gy and a huge army of the unem­ployed liv­ing in squalor. A robot can make an iPhone but it can­not pur­chase one. If we want to main­tain demand, we must put mon­ey into people’s pock­ets. A Universal Basic Income stim­u­lates demand far more effec­tive­ly than any tax cut. .… “During the post war Golden Age of the American mid­dle class, the ben­e­fits of tech­no­log­i­cal progress were shared equi­tably, through wage hikes. As tech­nol­o­gy made work­ers more pro­duc­tive, their wages went up com­men­su­rate­ly. Since Reagan, tech­nol­o­gy has con­tin­ued its inex­orable progress but wages stopped ris­ing. Assets prices (homes, stocks, bonds) instead absorbed the ben­e­fits of pro­duc­tiv­i­ty increas­es. The rich got rich­er, work­ers didn’t.”

Paying for a basic income guarantee with universal assets instead of taxes

James K. Boyce and Peter Barnes writ­ing for Evonomics offer a viable answer to the ques­tion of how to pay for a basic income guar­an­tee: Dividends from our com­mon­ly held uni­ver­sal assets:

“The wealth we inher­it and cre­ate togeth­er is worth tril­lions of dol­lars, yet we present­ly derive almost no income from it. Our joint inher­i­tance includes invalu­able gifts of nature such as our atmos­phere, min­er­als and fresh water, and social­ly cre­at­ed assets such as our legal and finan­cial infra­struc­ture, with­out which pri­vate cor­po­ra­tions couldn’t exist, much less thrive.”

By forc­ing those who squan­der our com­mon wealth — pol­lut­ing cor­po­ra­tions that threat­en our atmos­phere, for starters, — to inter­nal­ize (and pay) these cur­rent­ly exter­nal­ized costs (that we’re all forced to pay) we simul­ta­ne­ous­ly improve our envi­ron­ment and gen­er­ate dis­trib­utable div­i­dends. Similarly, mar­ket prices could be charged for com­mon wealth resource extrac­tion (think min­er­als and tim­ber) that is cur­rent­ly allowed to take place with min­i­mal cost to the extrac­tor but max­i­mum cost to the rest of us, adding to the dis­trib­utable div­i­dend pool.

With regard to our com­mon­ly held soci­etal assets like our legal and finan­cial infra­struc­ture, Boyce and Barnes cite Nobel econ­o­mist Herbert Simon speak­ing to the ques­tion of earned indi­vid­ual wealth: “If we’re very gen­er­ous with our­selves, I sup­pose we might claim we ‘earned’ as much as one-fifth of our income. The rest is pat­ri­mo­ny asso­ci­at­ed with being a mem­ber of an enor­mous­ly pro­duc­tive social sys­tem.” We can col­lec­tive­ly reap mas­sive shared div­i­dends by attach­ing a price to the use of these com­mon­ly-held assets. Boyce and Barnes sug­gest “… mod­est trans­ac­tion fees on trades of stocks, bonds and deriv­a­tives could gen­er­ate more than US$300 bil­lion per year.” In addi­tion to gen­er­at­ing shared div­i­dends, such a trans­ac­tion fee would help sta­bi­lize our finan­cial sys­tem (a com­mon­ly-held asset) by dis­cour­ag­ing spec­u­la­tion. “Similar fees could be applied to patent and roy­al­ty earn­ings, which are returns not only to inno­va­tion but also to monop­oly rights grant­ed and enforced by soci­ety,” write Boyce and Barnes.

Under the sce­nario pro­posed by Boyce and Barnes, these div­i­dends would not be paid to the gov­ern­ment in the form of tax­es, but direct­ly and auto­mat­i­cal­ly to every cit­i­zen with a Social Security account with almost no addi­tion­al bureau­cra­cy.

Stefan Hilts will jam the Overton window wide open for a basic income guarantee

Economist and data sci­en­tist Stefan Hilts is tak­ing a year on his own dime to intense­ly study a basic income guar­an­tee. Best of all, he’s doing it in pub­lic, in real-time, reveal­ing his find­ings as they become appar­ent.

Hilts pro­vides three pos­i­tive and appeal­ing rea­sons for his attrac­tion to an in-depth study of the basic income guar­an­tee con­cept:

Guaranteeing a basic stan­dard of liv­ing while simul­ta­ne­ous­ly trust­ing indi­vid­u­als to appro­pri­ate­ly man­age their affairs is a vir­tu­ous under­tak­ing. A basic income guar­an­tee fits with­in the cur­rent mar­ket struc­ture, so it’s what he calls “non-dis­tortive.” The admin­is­tra­tive infra­struc­ture for a basic income guar­an­tee already exists.

Although Hilts doesn’t count increased and accel­er­at­ed inno­va­tion as one of his “big three” rea­sons, he clear­ly acknowl­edges it:

“.… A stronger safe­ty net will also pro­vide peo­ple with the secu­ri­ty to found new busi­ness­es and explore new oppor­tu­ni­ties, and could encour­age migra­tion to cities with low costs of liv­ing but where job mar­kets have strug­gled. …”

Hilts avoids Pollyannaism by clear­ly rec­og­niz­ing two poten­tial down­sides:

“There are also poten­tial down­sides, and my research focus is just as much on the neg­a­tive effects as the pos­i­tive ones, with the biggest poten­tial issues being costs (and the impact of the high­er tax­es like­ly nec­es­sary to finance this), and the poten­tial down­ward shifts in labor force par­tic­i­pa­tion, which in a worst case could con­strict the economy’s abil­i­ty to grow.”

Hilts hopes the prod­uct of his analy­sis effort will be “… an eco­nom­i­cal­ly sound pro­pos­al that gives the best chance of suc­cess to max­i­mize social good and pre­pare for an uncer­tain future.”

The innovation dividend of a basic income guarantee

Hilts read­i­ly acknowl­edges the inno­va­tion ben­e­fit asso­ci­at­ed with a basic income guar­an­tee, but hasn’t yet inves­ti­gat­ed just how deep and rich this ben­e­fit is like­ly to be.

In “Universal basic income will accel­er­ate inno­va­tion by reduc­ing our fear of fail­ure,” Scott Santens takes a deep dive into a uni­ver­sal basic income guar­an­tee pro­vid­ing the fuel for the evo­lu­tion of inno­va­tion by mov­ing us, col­lec­tive­ly, past the fear of fail­ure. Santens main­tains that tri­al and error — the very process of evo­lu­tion (and our dis­cov­ery of it) — is what has got­ten us this far as a species.

Our mar­kets work as decen­tral­ized com­plex adap­tive sys­tems, end­less­ly iter­at­ing tri­al and error. Without mon­ey — a suf­fi­cient amount of mon­ey dis­trib­uted to all mar­ket par­tic­i­pants — mar­kets fail. With suf­fi­cient mon­ey that is suf­fi­cient­ly dis­trib­uted, mar­kets adapt and evolve through tri­al and error. Desirable iter­a­tions thrive; unde­sir­able ones fail.

Underlying every iter­a­tion — every tri­al and every error — is risk. Santens explains:

“Taking risks is equiv­a­lent to ran­dom genet­ic muta­tion in this bio­log­i­cal anal­o­gy. A new prod­uct or ser­vice intro­duced into the mar­ket can result in suc­cess or fail­ure. The out­come is entire­ly unknown until it’s tried. What suc­ceeds can make some­one rich and what fails can bank­rupt some­one. That’s a big risk. We tra­di­tion­al­ly like to think of these risk-tak­ers as a spe­cial kind of per­son, but real­ly they’re most­ly just those who are eco­nom­i­cal­ly secure enough to feel fail­ure isn’t scari­er than the poten­tial for suc­cess.”

A basic income guar­an­tee would elim­i­nate — or at least great­ly reduce — the fear of fail­ure result­ing in an accel­er­at­ing rate of entre­pre­neur­ship and inno­va­tion. This would reverse the alarm­ing cur­rent down­ward spi­ral of the rate of entre­pre­neur­ship. Santens attrib­ut­es this to “risk aver­sion due to ris­ing inse­cu­ri­ty.”

Economic inse­cu­ri­ty is grow­ing because we’ve “been active­ly erod­ing the insti­tu­tions that pooled risk like trade unions and our pub­lic safe­ty net,” writes Santens. “Incomes adjust­ed for infla­tion have not budged for decades, and the jobs pro­vid­ing those incomes have gone from secure careers to inse­cure jobs, part-time and con­tract work, and now recent­ly even gig labor in the shar­ing econ­o­my.”

The for­mu­la is sim­ple: Decreasing eco­nom­ic secu­ri­ty is irrev­o­ca­bly tied to risk aver­sion. “Entrepreneurship and risk are inex­tri­ca­bly linked,” writes Santens. “Reducing risk aver­sion is para­mount to inno­va­tion.”

Santens argues that in order to advance and accel­er­ate inno­va­tion we have to not only reduce the risk of fail­ure but actu­al­ly increase the rate of fail­ure. Like nature and evo­lu­tion, we learn more from our fail­ures than our suc­cess­es. “This is basi­cal­ly the sci­en­tif­ic method in a nut­shell,” writes Santens. “It’s designed to rule out what isn’t true, not to deter­mine what is true. There is a very impor­tant dif­fer­ence between the two.”

Santens cites a state­ment by Buckminster Fuller in a 30 March 1970 inter­view with Elizabeth Barlow for New York Magazine:

“We must do away with the absolute­ly spe­cious notion that every­body has to earn a liv­ing. It is a fact today that one in ten thou­sand of us can make a tech­no­log­i­cal break­through capa­ble of sup­port­ing all the rest. The youth of today are absolute­ly right in rec­og­niz­ing this non­sense of earn­ing a liv­ing. We keep invent­ing jobs because of this false idea that every­body has to be employed at some kind of drudgery because, accord­ing to Malthusian-Darwinian the­o­ry, he must jus­ti­fy his right to exist. So we have inspec­tors of inspec­tors and peo­ple mak­ing instru­ments for inspec­tors to inspect inspec­tors. The true busi­ness of peo­ple should be to go back to school and think about what­ev­er it was they were think­ing about before some­body came along and told them they had to earn a liv­ing.”

Santens notes that Paul Graham of Y Combinator iden­ti­fies this as “Black Swan Farming.” The biggest and most suc­cess­ful ideas are ini­tial­ly seen as the least like­ly to suc­ceed. Accordingly, the best strat­e­gy would be to cast the widest pos­si­ble idea net fund­ed with social invest­ment “… in full recog­ni­tion that even at such great cost, the ROI from the inno­va­tion of the Black Swans would far sur­pass the cost,” writes Santens.

It’s pos­si­ble that by forc­ing peo­ple to earn a liv­ing we’re sti­fling those poten­tial­ly par­a­digm-shift­ing Black Swans. As Santens pos­es the ques­tion: “What if our fears of each oth­er being ful­ly free to pur­sue what­ev­er most inter­ests us, includ­ing noth­ing, is an obsta­cle to an explo­sion of entre­pre­neur­ship and tru­ly huge inno­va­tions the likes of which have nev­er been seen?”

A basic income guar­an­tee would, first and fore­most, remove the fear of not hav­ing the basic essen­tials of liv­ing. Consequently, the fear of risk of fail­ure would sim­i­lar­ly be removed: