‘Arrow’: Dinah Drake’s New Black Canary Costume For Season 6 Revealed

Dinah Drake is officially suiting up as the next Black Canary in Arrow Season 6. Entertainment Weekly revealed today the first look of Juliana Harkavy, who joined the series in Season 5, suited up as the new Black Canary. You can check out Dinah’s new costume below.

Entertainment Weekly also spoke with executive producer and showrunner Wendy Mericle about what’s coming up for Dinah in the new season. Mericle talked about in depth about what she likes about this version of the Black Canary outfit and what inspires Dinah to finally suit up.

“I can tell you what my favorite parts of it are and what I think it says about the character. Last season, she wasn’t a full fledged superhero, you could say. She was, she had this power, she had this ability, she was part of the team, but really what this costume signifies more than anything is that she is now a full-fledged member of the team. She was before. But she’s now owning it in a different way. We had talked about having the costume at various points last season and it never felt right. It felt that we wanted to save it for a special occasion, and the premiere seemed like a really good place to do it. She needs something tactical. She has this meta power, but she also has the bo staff, so we just felt it was right for her to have something that was definitely more than a nod to the DCU character, but also something that was distinctive from what we’ve seen before. This really fits the bill. Maya Mani, as usual, did an amazing job with it. My favorite part is actually the subtle hint of the gold and yellow lines in it.”

“After a violent shipwreck, billionaire playboy Oliver Queen (Stephen Amell) was missing and presumed dead for five years before being discovered alive on a remote island in the North China Sea. He returned home to Star City, bent on righting the wrongs done by his family and fighting injustice. As the Green Arrow, he protects his city with the help of former soldier John Diggle (David Ramsey), computer-science expert Felicity Smoak (Emily Bett Rickards), his vigilante-trained sister Thea Queen (Willa Holland), Deputy Mayor Quentin Lance (Paul Blackthorne), brilliant inventor Curtis Holt (Echo Kellum), and his new recruits, street-savvy Rene Ramirez (Rick Gonzalez) and meta-human Dinah Drake (Juliana Harkavy). Oliver has finally solidified and strengthened his crime-fighting team only to have it threatened when unexpected enemies from his past return to Star City, forcing Oliver to rethink his relationship with each member of his “family”

Arrow Season 6 premieres on Thursday, October 12 at 9/8c on The CW.

What do you think about Dinah Drake’s new Black Canary costume on Arrow? Sound off in the comments below.

Source: Entertainment Weekly