CLASSES AT CLEVELAND – SHOOT POINT BLANK

Cleveland Basic Handgun Classes (4 hours)

Students will need

50 rounds of ammunition, which can be purchased at this location.

A firearm. Rentals are available for anyone who does not own a firearm

Ear and eye protection, available to rent or purchase in Cleveland location

A hat and speed loaders are recommended, but optional

Cleveland CCW Skills (4 hours)

Students will need

150-200 rounds of ammunition, which can be purchased at Shoot Point Blank

A firearm the student is comfortable shooting

At least two magazines

Ear and eye protection, available to rent or purchase

A holster is highly recommended.

A hat and speed loaders are recommended, but optional

Lady Sure Shots

With multiple class offerings, ranging from the beginner to the experienced shooter, there is a class for everyone! We have temperature controlled classrooms at our Cleveland location and a wide range of dates and times to meet your needs. All classes are taught by an NRA Certified instructor and all shooting happens in our indoor shooting range facility. You can register for any of our classes either in store or online Great for Beginners! In this four-hour course, students will learn safety, parts of a pistol, ammunition and shooting fundamentals. This includes 1 hour of range time! This is also a great refresher course for anyone who has spent time away from firearms.This course is designed for anyone who has a Concealed Carry License, but wants to become more comfortable with the techniques involved. With live demonstrations and hands on drills in the classroom, the student can become more knowledgeable and skilled in a concealed situation. This class includes two hours of range time.Shoot Point Blank Cleveland Range and GunShop’s very own female shooting club! Female shooters of all levels gather once a month at any of our Shoot Point Blank Cleveland location to discuss topics relating to shooting, right holsters, ammunition and much more. There is no annual fee or commitment. Come as you please and it’s only $10 per session! The session is one and a half-hour long and includes an hour of range time. No experience is necessary and all skill levels are welcome!