Jeremy Corbyn must put forward a programme for government, Carwyn Jones has said as he warned voters do not know what Labour would do if it secured power in Westminster.

The Welsh First Minister said that Labour needs a “ruthless focus on the things that matter to ordinary people” and implored Mr Corbyn to reach out “beyond London” and focus on “sounding authentic”.

He also argued the spread of fake news on social media is making it harder for Labour to make its case to people online.

It comes days after he criticised Mr Corbyn’s “London-centric” stance on immigration, which he warned could prompt Labour voters to switch to Ukip.

Speaking to Buzzfeed News, Mr Jones said: "At the moment people would struggle to know what Labour's programme for government would be in Westminster.

"I've made this point with Jeremy - we've got to have a programme for government. We're not in that position yet across the UK.

"It means a ruthless focus on the things that matter to ordinary people. Immigration matters to ordinary people.

"It means being robust on workers' rights, on issues such as pensions, and not accepting that the whole world is an enormous free market."

When asked whether he thought Labour could win the general election in 2020, Mr Jones said “I hope there is”, adding: “It’s a long way away yet.”

FAKE NEWS

Mr Jones lamented that parties on the right in Britain had taken up social media "more quickly" than the centre left.

He voiced concerns that fake news is making it harder for Labour to convey its policies on issues including immigration.

The Welsh First Minister also revealed he had to correct untruths regarding Labour policy while campaigning from stories picked up on Facebook by the public.

“My fear is that people will lose the ability to distinguish between rubbish and what has actually happened,” he said.

“They expect newspapers to come at things from a certain angle – if you read the Express you expect it to be Brexit-mad and make allowances. But people are not used to making those allowances online.

“The problem is being able to tell people that you can’t treat Breitbart in the same way as the BBC; they come at it from a very different perspective.”