way better then expected. im a fan of blomkamps movies I have to admit. they are somewhat formulaic but it kind of always works because its an actual original idea. yeah Elysium was kinda weak, but it was better then most of the garbage that's being pumped out these days. I was excited to

way better then expected. im a fan of blomkamps movies I have to admit. they are somewhat formulaic but it kind of always works because its an actual original idea. yeah Elysium was kinda weak, but it was better then most of the garbage that's being pumped out these days. I was excited to see this since the 1st trailer I saw. marketing was solid as it wasn't constant bombardment of ads showing only the cool stuff. so its always surprising how the story unfolds, but then the critics, my god, the critics hammered this movie. I almost didn't want to see it. but it was perfect because when I eventually did see it my expectations were considerably lowered, and I was pleasantly surprised with a solid sci-fi future action flick. critics all said it was really blomkamp-y being filmed in s. Africa-again, but it actually wasn't as bad as elysm, which looked like they used the D9 set. it was gritty but it only added to the whole futuristic dystopian blah, blah, blah. having unknown actors was cool, I guess theyre actually famous for something, but ive never heard of them so it works out perfectly. s.african/English accent is brutal to listen to, but you get used to it as the movie goes on and begin to understand what theyre saying, chappie as a kid and learning was a dope idea for the movie, but the plot holes that came along with that story were the only downside to the movie. but chappie's development and personality were great. the critics made him out to be jar jar binx or something, but really was not that bad. silly in some parts but not outright annoying. the bad guy was basically the same bad guy as in D9, elysm. I mean really the same-exact-character. but aside from that I didn't see the whole Robocop comparison, I mean yeah the robots did look similar, but different story.

overall there were a lot of plot holes, but it was a good action movie. decent special effects, great story but a few too many stretches in the story were this movies downfall. its worth a watch.

…