Hello Pi Pans Backers,

You all recently received an email that our team is involved in a legal dispute. Kickstarter has locked down the ability for us to send a mass update, so I am writing you directly (please note that we still can message our backers one-on-one through Kickstarter). For those who have not received their pan just yet, do not fear. We will make sure that everyone gets their order.



So as Jerry Seinfeld would say, “What’s the deal with this intellectual property dispute?” Another company has trademarked the word “Pi Pans” for use in bake ware. A couple of things are curious: (1) their Pi Pan is an octagon shape (not even circular!) and (2) you can’t even buy it yet.







This company chose two words “Pi” and “Pans” that are very generic and trademarked them. After talking with several lawyers, we feel that calling our product a "Pi Pan" is fair use, because "Pi Pan" is the most succinct, generic name for our pan. This would be akin to someone trademarking “Chocolate Milk” and then complaining when Borden or any other dairy tried to sell a bottle of chocolate milk. If there is milk and it is chocolate flavored, there is quite frankly nothing else that you can call that product.





Image courtesy of Canadian Pacific via Flickr.



The shape of the pan is that of the Greek letter "Pi," which is why we call them “Pi Pans.” It accurately and generically describes a characteristic of the pans we are selling. If we were selling pans shaped like the letter “A,” we’d call them “A Pans.” If we were selling pie pans where the sizes of the pans followed the golden ratio, we would probably call them “Phi Pans,” and though they wouldn’t be shaped like the Greek letter “Phi” the term “Phi Pans” would be accurately descriptive just the same because of a characteristic of the pans.







We tried to resolve this amicably, offering to change our name to Pi Pie Pans but the company did not find this acceptable (this has led us to question what they will do about the Pi Cake Pans person). Consequently, their team emailed Kickstarter to have our product blocked. We are appealing to Kickstarter as we feel that we are not infringing on their trademark and that we are not doing this with any bad faith intent to benefit from or capitalize on their concept. We cannot imagine an instance where someone would go looking for their kind of pie pan on the Internet or elsewhere and mistake their octagonal-shaped pans with our pans shaped like the Greek letter.



So that is the long and short of it. If you have any questions, you can still message us in the Kickstarter portal or reply directly to pipans314@gmail.com. If you haven’t filled out your survey yet, please go ahead and get that done so we can mail you your pan. Thank you all for your support and understanding. All we wanted to do was bring a Pi pie Pan to the world and a little joy in every geeky bakers life.



Happy baking,



Pi People LLC

www.pipans.com



PS: Why would anyone would think of calling an octagon shaped pan a Pi Pan? I mean really? REALLY?



