From OpenZFS

Welcome to OpenZFS

OpenZFS brings together developers and users from various open-source forks of the original ZFS on different platforms and we're always looking to grow our community. There are a multitude of ways to contribute to the project and contributors are happy to help newcomers. As we add diverse perspectives, our community becomes richer, and we're committed to creating an environment where all people feel welcome. Information for new contributors is available here.

Summary

OpenZFS was announced in September 2013 as the truly open source successor to the ZFS project. Our community brings together developers from the illumos, FreeBSD, Linux, OS X and Windows platforms, and a wide range of companies that build products on top of OpenZFS.

OpenZFS is an outstanding storage platform that encompasses the functionality of traditional filesystems, volume managers, and more, with consistent reliability, functionality and performance across all distributions:

illumos Webpage GitHub FreeBSD Webpage GitHub ZFS on Linux Webpage GitHub OpenZFS on OS X Webpage GitHub OpenZFS on Windows Webpage GitHub

News

Matt Ahrens and George Wilson gave a talk on OpenZFS Basics at SCALE16x, March 2018. Slides and Video

The ZFS User Conference was held April 2018. Videos now posted.

Matt Ahrens gave a talk at BSDCAN: Flexible Disk Use in OpenZFS?, June 2018

Sara Hartse gave a talk at BSDCAN: 100x Faster Clone Deletion for ZFS, June 2018

OpenZFS Developer Summit was held September 10-11, 2018.

The first OpenZFS Leadership Meeting will be held October 9, 2018

The sixth annual OpenZFS Developer Summit was held September 10-11, 2018 in San Francisco.

Talks: Day 1

Talks: Day 2

The bulk of this day will be spent on the hackathon but in the morning we'll have a few shorter talks and discussions, around 10-20 minutes each:

Hackathon

Hackathon presentation video

Audience Choice Awards:

Prize Project Participants 1st place zpool status in color / 🔥 Tony Hutter 2nd place vdev properties Pavel Zahkarov, Allan Jude, Brian Behlendorf, and others 3rd place Newcomer track; how to ask for money; AND setting props from channel progs Sara Hartse

Automated Testing

Pull requests submitted to our GitHub page are automatically tested, by running ztest and the ZFS Test Suite. We use illumos VM's running on AWS to perform the tests, and results are available publicly.

Thanks to infrastructure sponsor Nexenta for covering our AWS hosting costs!

Goals

The high-level goals of OpenZFS are:

to raise awareness of the quality, utility, and availability of open source implementations of ZFS

of the quality, utility, and availability of open source implementations of ZFS to encourage open communication about ongoing efforts to improve open source ZFS

about ongoing efforts to improve open source ZFS to ensure consistent reliability, functionality, and performance of all distributions of ZFS.

The main technical goal of OpenZFS is easier sharing of code between platforms. Strategies include:

creating a platform-independent mailing list for developers to review ZFS code and architecture changes from all platforms

smoothing the illumos integration process

making it easy to run both ztest and the ZFS test suite (TestRunner or STF based) on each platform

reducing code differences between the platforms.

Donate

We accept donations to cover our ongoing costs.

OpenZFS is an associated project of SPI (Software in the Public Interest). SPI is a 501(c)3 nonprofit organization which handles our donations, finances, and legal holdings. You can donate through paypal using the link below:

Site orientation

All main pages (alphabetical order) …

Twitter

Tweets by @OpenZFS

Follow @openzfs

Tweet