CLOSE Free Press sports writers Dave Birkett and Carlos Monarrez break down the totality of the Lions' 2017 NFL draft class.

Lions likely drafted stud at linebacker and a few projects that could contribute as rookies in second, third rounds

(From left) Lions coach Jim Caldwell, first-round draft pick Jarrad Davis, general manager Bob Quinn and president Rod Wood at the Allen Park practice facility April 28, 2017. (Photo: Kirthmon F. Dozier, DFP)

Bob Quinn said it takes two years to properly judge a draft class, and while he’s 100% right, we’re not afforded that kind of time in the Internet age.

That’s why my draft grades this year (as always) don’t reflect a prospect’s talent so much as what the Lions did or didn’t do to maximize the value of the pick.

Last year, the Lions landed one Day 1 starter among their 10 selections, two other players who found their way into the starting lineup throughout the course of the year and a host of role players. A lot can change in the next 4 1/2 months, but it wouldn’t surprise me if this year’s Lions’ draft haul took on a similar shape. First pick Jarrad Davis should be a starter the minute he steps on the field for minicamp next week. He’s that good of a player, and the Lions have that big a need at LB.

Related:

Beyond that, the Lions’ second- and third-round picks might need some developmental time. Teez Tabor was a very good college player, but there are questions about his speed, and he plays a position that historically has been a tough transition for rookies. Third-rounder Kenny Golladay immediately becomes the No. 3 receiver, but there’s always the chance Anquan Boldin returns.

Overall, I gave the Lions a B on this year’s draft. They filled needs at linebacker, cornerback and tight end. They added depth to the secondary and on special teams. And they took the smart approach with their most important pick, likely landing a cornerstone defensive player in the first round.

Brad Kaaya of the Miami Hurricanes celebrates after a touchdown against the Appalachian State Mountaineers during their game at Kidd Brewer Stadium on September 17, 2016 in Boone, North Carolina. (Photo: Streeter Lecka, Getty Images)

Here are my pick-by-pick grades for the draft:

Jarrad Davis, Florida linebacker (first round, No. 21)

Grade: A

Davis may never be a star, but he’s a much better prospect than people gave him credit, and his intangibles and positional value made him the right choice at Round 1. The run on offensive players didn’t dramatically affect who was on the board for the Lions at No. 21. The only player I would have considered over Davis was Alabama linebacker Reuben Foster. Foster is an elite talent at linebacker, but he comes with medical and off-field questions that have answers we’re not privy to. Davis was the right call for the Lions in Round 1.

CB Teez Tabor, Florida (second round, No. 53)

Grade: C

Is it possible to think the player can succeed in the NFL but still have concerns about the pick? Tabor, as everyone knows, ran slow 40-yard dash times at the combine and his pro day. Bob Quinn said he’s more concerned with a player’s instincts and “reactionary athleticism” than timed speed, but Tabor’s 4.6- to 4.7-second speed is a legitimate concern.

More than that, I believe that when teams have baseline metrics they use while scouting prospects — i.e., an offensive lineman’s arm length or a cornerback’s speed — they shouldn’t make exceptions for players who fall outside of those numbers.

Bob Quinn has never shared his baseline speed numbers for a cornerback, and Tabor clearly was one of the best defensive backs in college football last year. Still, the pick raises concerns.

WR Kenny Golladay, Northern Illinois (third round, No. 96)

Grade: B

Along with linebacker, wide receiver was the Lions’ biggest position need coming into the draft, so they needed to come away with a player who could contribute in some form or fashion as a rookie. Golladay has size (6-4) and speed (4.5), though his late growth spurt and midmajor competition could make for a steep learning curve. Still, given the other options on the board after a number of their targets went early in the round, I can’t quibble with the Lions’ decision to trade down and take the best receiver left on their board.

LB Jalen Reeves-Maybin, Tennessee (fourth round, No. 124)

Grade: B-minus

Quinn has said repeatedly that it’s important for Day 3 picks to have special-teams value, and Reeves-Maybe oozes that. He doesn’t have an immediate role on defense, but Tahir Whitehead and Paul Worrilow have expiring contracts after this year. Reeves-Maybin comes from impressive bloodlines — his cousin is former Tigers outfielder Cameron Maybin — but given the dwindling role linebackers have in the NFL, adding two in the first four rounds is curious.

Related:

TE Michael Roberts, Toledo (fourth round, No. 127)

Grade: B-plus

I like the Roberts pick both from a talent and need standpoint. He should play as the third tight end this fall behind Eric Ebron and Darren Fells, and he’ll be a nice complement to Ebron going forward. He was an exceptional red-zone threat at Toledo and is a solid blocker. Lions fans may always wonder, though, if they might have been better taking Michigan’s Jake Butt, the next tight end to come off the board.

CLOSE Here's a quick glance at the players the Lions picked up over the three-day 2017 NFL draft. Video by Kirkland Crawford/DFP Wochit

CB Jamal Agnew, San Diego (fifth round, No. 165)

Grade: B

You never can have too many cornerbacks in today’s NFL. Some may think this was a tad high for Agnew, a noncombine invite who’ll be limited to playing slot cornerback. But he has return ability, and if he plays a punt returner this fall, the Lions will have found themselves a rookie contributor in the fifth round.

Oct 24, 2015; DeKalb, IL, USA; Northern Illinois Huskies wide receiver Kenny Golladay reacts after a touchdown against the Eastern Michigan Eagles during the second quarter at Huskie Stadium. (Photo: Mike Dinovo, USA TODAY Sports)

DL Jeremiah Ledbetter, Arkansas (sixth round, No. 205)

Grade C-plus

The Lions waited 200-plus picks to take their first lineman, a departure from last year when they drafted help for the trenches with each of their first three selections. Ledbetter will start his career as a tackle but also can play end, and will need some refinement in order to earn a roster spot.

QB Brad Kaaya, Miami (sixth round, No. 215)

Grade A

The Lions took a developmental quarterback in the sixth round for the second straight season after Kaaya fell further than most draftniks expected. He’s a three-year starter at Miami who’s just 21. He might never develop into anything beyond a backup, but with one of the last picks in the sixth round, this was a wise investment. He should compete for the No. 2 job with Jake Rudock this fall.

Pat O'Connor, Eastern Michigan (seventh round, No. 250)

Grade: C

O’Connor is an athletic defensive end who took part in the Lions’ local day workout. He’ll have to compete with Ledbetter and others for a roster spot, but the Lions thought enough of him that they didn’t want to risk losing him as an undrafted free agent.

Contact Dave Birkett: dbirkett@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @davebirkett. Download our Lions Xtra app for free on Apple and Android!