A controversial bill was proposed on February 3, 2016 that aims to privatize the US air traffic control. Under this legislation, a private corporation would be formed, which will control the air traffic control operations.

It will be governed by an 11-member board which will constitute representatives from civil commercial airlines, general aviation, pilot unions, air traffic controllers’ unions, and members appointed by the government.

If implemented, it will take away certain control from FAA. FAA would however still be involved to set air traffic regulations and provide safety oversight.

The new private non-profit organization would be run from the funding collected through fees on commercial flights. Private aircraft owners and business-jet operators would however be exempted from the fees, only retaining the existing fuel taxes.

Support and Opposition

The bill has found unusual support from National Air Traffic Controllers Association (representing almost 15,000 controllers) and Airlines for America (trade group for most of the major US airlines), however is largely opposed by the some of the lawmakers, and Air Line Pilots Association. Delta Airlines, which split from the ‘Airlines for America’ trade group in 2015, has also opposed the proposal.

Air traffic controller’s union however views that in current scenario of growing inefficiencies, lack of upgradation of old equipment, and unstable funding; privatization could be the solution to bring in some operational changes and efficiencies. The current system under the FAA is extremely safe, but highly inefficient.

The US is the single largest aviation market in the world, and also has the highest number of domestic air passengers worldwide. The supporters of the bill feel that in view of growing air passengers, the current inefficiencies in the system will not be capable enough to modernize the infrastructure at the much needed pace, as per the growing demand for air travel.

The proposed bill also aims to change the way new aircraft are approved in the US, which will make the US aircraft manufacturers more competitive in the market.

Furthermore, privatization is also supposed to bring some other benefits to the air travellers. For example, it aims to force airlines to enhance their operational efficiency. In case of baggage delays (more than 24 hours on domestic flight), airlines will have to refund the baggage fees to the customer.

Based on these benefits, lawmakers affiliated with various air traffic control organizations have proposed the privatization of US air traffic control for more than eight times over the last 40 years.

Some of the other countries including Australia, Canada, Germany, and the UK have implemented the private or semi-private air traffic control model.

Downside to Privatization of Air Traffic Control

Non-supporters have voiced that the proposed bill gives more power to the airlines, and will diminish the leverage to influence from the public.

The ‘Air Line Pilots Association’ said in a statement that the proposed legislation fails to address strongly on aviation safety, such as lack of measures to address risks posed by the unregulated carriage of lithium ion batteries.

Furthermore, it is feared that the plan for privatization and the processes involved may further delay the implementation of NextGen program in the US.

NextGen program largely aims to upgrade the US air traffic infrastructure, and transition from ground-based to satellite-based navigation. NextGen is a US$ 42 billion program which also involves major companies such as Harris Corp., Lockheed Martin, and Raytheon.

Subscribe to Aerodesh for More Aviation/Aerospace Industry News, Analysis, and Market Insight

For Aviation Consulting, Strategic Market Analysis and Market Research Reports: contact@aerodesh.com